RPG - manages gem packages. quickly.
====================================

This is rpg, a package management utility for unix based on the Rubygems package
format and repository protocol. rpg installs Ruby packages distributed from
rubygems.org with full support for dependency resolution, native extension
compilation, and package upgrades.

rpg can be thought of as a non-compatible alternative to the gem command shipped
with Rubygems. Most commonly used gem operations are available in rpg, often in
ways that are a bit different from the gem command, both in interface and
implementation. See the *VERSUS RUBYGEMS* section below for details on these
differences.

rpg and Rubygems can co-exist on a system, though Rubygems is not required for
rpg to operate. Packages installed with rpg override packages installed with the
gem command.

STATUS
------

Experimental. Using rpg with system rubys is not yet recommended. Suggested use
is with rvm or custom, non-system ruby builds. See the KNOWN-ISSUES file for a
list of potential gotchas and general annoyances.

IMPORTANT: In its default configuration, rpg installs library files under the
active Ruby interpreter's `vendor_ruby` or `site_ruby` directory. The `rpg
config` command outputs the current destination installation paths -- use it to
verify the active configuration before performing destructive operations.

INSTALLING
----------

To install rpg under the default location (`/usr/local`):

    ./configure
    make
    [sudo] make install

To install rpg into a self-contained directory off your home:

    ./configure --prefix=~/.rpg
    make
    make install

You may need to add `<prefix>/bin` to your `PATH` if it isn't there already:

    PATH="$PATH:<prefix>/bin"

The installation puts files under the `bin`, `libexec`, and `share/man`
directories of the configured `<prefix>`. See `configure --help` for
information on tuning these default locations.

See `rpg --help` once installed for a list of available commands and general
program usage.

VERSUS RUBYGEMS
---------------

  * Like gem, rpg uses rubygems.org as its package repository and gem
    files as its package format. Installing from other sources is not yet
    supported, but is likely to be added in the near future.

  * Like gem, rpg supports dependency resolution using the information
    included in a gem's specification metadata.

  * Like gem, rpg supports building and installing native / dynamic library
    extensions.

  * Like gem, rpg has a rich set of commands for installing, upgrading,
    and uninstalling packages; listing installed, available, and outdated
    packages; and utilities for unpacking gem files and inspecting gem
    specifications.

  * Like gem, rpg is made up of exactly three characters.

  * Unlike gem, rpg organizes the files it installs by file type, not by
    package. For instance, Ruby library files are placed directly under a
    single `lib` directory (the currently active `site_ruby` directory by
    default), executables under `/usr/local/bin` (configurable), manpages
    under `/usr/local/share/man`, etc.

  * Unlike gem, rpg is not capable of installing multiple versions of the
    same package into a single rpg environment -- the package's files would
    overwrite each other. All version conflicts must be resolved at install
    time.

  * Unlike gem, rpg has no runtime component (e.g., `require 'rubygems'`).
    Because all library files are placed under a common `lib` directory, and
    because package versions are sussed at install time, there's no need for
    a component to select which packages are active at runtime.
 
  * Unlike gem, rpg's installed package database is filesystem based,
    documented, and built for extension.

  * Unlike gem, rpg is written primarily in POSIX shell and requires a unix
    environment.

  * Unlike gem, rpg does not provide commands for building gems or running
    gem servers.

  * Unlike gem, rpg installs packages in two stages: 1.) fetch package files
    and resolve dependencies, and 2.) install package contents. This allows
    for staged/later installs and conflict detection before install.

  * rpg outperforms the gem command in many ways. Most comparable
    operations complete in at least one order of magnitude less time.

ABOUT
-----

rpg's design is inspired by a variety of existing tools. Rubygems itself gets
many things right in UI, and you can't argue with the popularity of the package
format and repository within the Ruby community.

Many of the ideas -- and maybe even some code -- were taken from Rip
<http://defunkt.github.com/rip/>. That's understating it, really. rpg started
out just a couple of loose shell scripts to experiment with potential ideas for
integrating gem package and gem dependency support into rip. The plan was to
port them over to Ruby and into Rip if they panned out. Within a few days, I had
a more or less entire implementation of Rubygems's gem command in POSIX shell
staring back at me and it was *fast*. I will very likely propose many of the
ideas in rpg be taken into Rip. Surely the Ruby portions of rpg that read
release indexes and gemspecs could be useful at least.

Debian's apt and dpkg, FreeBSD's ports system, and Redhat/Fedora's yum all
influenced rpg's design in various ways.

Git's overall design influenced rpg significantly. Git's internal project
organization provides a roadmap for writing moderate sized systems using many
small specialized programs. Its granular use of the filesystem as a database
(the .git/refs and .git/objects hierarchies, especially) informed much of rpg's
package database design.

COPYING
-------

Copyright (c) 2010 by Ryan Tomayko <tomayko.com/about>

This is Free Software distributed under the terms of the MIT license.
See the COPYING file for license rights and limitations.
